#A draft set of required, recommended, and optional Dublin Core metadata elements to be used to annotate SSIII ontologies

= Dublin Core Reference Documents =

[http://dublincore.org/ Dublin Core Metadata Initiative Home Page]

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf# Dublin Core RDF (DC-RDF) document]


= SSIII DC Element Set =

These elements would be in addition to available RDF/OWL annotations, including:  rdfs:comment, owl:deprecated, owl:incompatibleWith, rdfs:isDefinedBy, rdfs:label, owl:priorVersion, rdfs:seeaAlso, owl:versionInfo

== Required ==


[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#creator Creator]: An entity primarily responsible for making the resource. (Ontology level)

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#creator Rights]: Information about rights held in and over the resource.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#source Source]: The described resource may be derived from the related resource in whole or in part. Recommended best practice is to identify the related resource by means of a string conforming to a formal identification system. (Class Level)

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#date Date]: A point or period of time associated with an event in the lifecycle of the resource. {{{(Note: this information could be inferred using owl:versionInfo contstructs) }}}

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#language Language]: A language of the resource.

== Recommended ==

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#coverage Coverage]: The spatial or temporal topic of the resource, the spatial applicability of the resource, or the jurisdiction under which the resource is relevant.
{{{ To be discussed.  Selection from items in Optional set }}}

== Optional ==

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#title Title]: A name given to the resource.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#subject Subject]: The topic of the resource.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#description Desrcription]: An account of the resource.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#publisher Publisher]: An entity responsible for making the resource available.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#contributor Contributor]: An entity responsible for making contributions to the resource.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#type Type]: The nature or genre of the resource.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#format Format]: The file format, physical medium, or dimensions of the resource.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#identifier Identifier]:  An unambiguous reference to the resource within a given context.

[http://dublincore.org/2010/10/11/dcelements.rdf#relation Relation]: A related resource.